Here's the hat from John Mortimer.
Oh!
Just don't even mind it.
It's there.
Looks very nice.
Very neat.
Small, isn't it?
Yeah.
I'm going to loosen my tie.
So tell me, have you been watching the O.J.
Simpson trial?
Oh, I have.
Are there any parallels?
You talk about embracing murderers.
I'm not asking you to judge the case, but I think you have your friends.
What it proves to me is that it's absolutely fatal to allow television cameras into courtrooms.
which we don't allow in England.
I think it's the most terrible thing for many reasons.
I mean, I think it's not a trial anymore.
It's a sort of mass entertainment.
But I mean, it's being watched in your country as well, isn't it?
Well, not much.
I think there are bits you can see.
I read someplace where they're showing a couple hours of it live at night.
Oh, yeah.
I don't know what, yes.
But it just seems, I mean, I think it's awful.
I mean, I think for lots and lots of reasons.
I mean, I think it's bad to be tried anyway, but to be tried in front of 18 minutes, you know, it's like being tried in a sports arena by Castro or something.
And also, if you're talking to a jury, it's quite an intimate affair.
occasion in a way, and if they're going to come back and give a verdict before all these millions of people, it must affect what they do.
But it certainly does make them more accountable, wouldn't you think?
One would hope.
Well, wrongly accountable, I think.
And I think it makes them much more conscious of mass public opinion, which they shouldn't be.
I mean, there is a racial division, as you know.
Yes.
I know, but...
And I think that the people who are behaving, if they're ever performing on television, I mean, the judge is behaving so... But he's allowing all these bench cards.
Well, he's relying on ridiculous things.
I don't know.
It seems to me like not a trial at all.
The other thing I think is terribly unhealthy is, you know, sort of 90% of the population not doing anything except sitting watching television.
And 10% of the people have to go out and do the murders and fall in love with each other's mothers.
to have the activity shooting channel in order to inform the rest of the population.
Well, let's... It's a nation of voyeurs.
Let's send you to the book again.
You wrote an autobiographical work 13 or so years ago.
Yeah.
Bringing to the record, yeah.
And tell me why you saw the need to...
Resume the trail.
Well, that finished 20 years ago, but this isn't really an autobiography.
It's just a book really about people passing through.
It's really a book about other people.
It's an memoir.
It's more of a memoir, you would say?
I'm not quite sure.
It's really a book about the people that passed through my life and what I thought of them and what I made of them, I suppose.
It isn't meant to be a... because I think the last 20 years of your life are difficult to make into a dramatic story, because you've probably arrived at what point you're going to arrive at, and that's that.
So really it's a book about the people that passed by, and the murderers and the friends.
Would you have expected the last 20 years, I guess you're about 73 now, would you, I guess...
Yeah, yeah.
Based on mathematics and reading here.
Yeah.
Has it been an eventful 20 years for you?
Well, I suppose so.
I mean, it's been rather like... I mean, it's been quite like all my life, but it's... except that it's been... In a way, I think old age is a happier period, because you don't have to worry.
You don't have to worry about making it or probably you've got enough money for us until you die.
And also you don't mind particularly what you say.
You don't have to please anybody or be polite or anything like that.
So I think in a way it's quite a happy turn.
Do you find that the creative juices are flowing as strongly as they were at the height of your activity, your creative activity?
Well, that's difficult for me to say.
I think I certainly write as much as I ever wrote.
Perhaps you don't have... Perhaps the ideas aren't as new as they were.
Perhaps that might be true.
But I think... I really think... I mean, Muriel Sparks said that, you know, when you're young, it's the time to sleep a lot and make love and not work very hard.
When you're old, there's nothing else to do but work really hard.
It's the best time.
Best time for production, yes.
Now, you became a full-time writer at 63, I guess.
No, not at all.
I was a full-time writer all my life.
But you gave up the law then, shall we say.
Yes, I gave up the law.
But giving up the law didn't make much effect to one way or another to my writing.
I wrote all the time as I was a lawyer.
And...
I didn't really, well, I suppose I read, no, I didn't really, I don't think it really made any difference.
I mean, the sort of lawyer that I was, I didn't work in an office or have a partner or have a boss or anything like that, so I could do it.
I know that towards the last ten years, I used to do about five cases a year, five big cases.
So, I don't think it made any difference to the other than I read.
but you do consider yourself then as having been your primary occupation, your primary profession, that was, was writing.
Exactly.
And law was my sort of waitressing.
You know, like girls who want to be film stars, get jobs in restaurants, etc.
Did you use it as source material?
Oh, yeah, well... I mean, as a flyer for the... Well, yes, certainly.
I mean, I certainly wouldn't have been able to write what I wrote unless I'd been a lawyer.
And also, I think it's a wonderful thing to have a job which gets you into touch with people.
A crisis over their lives.
Find out how people react to all sorts of strange things.
Life, love and death.
So it was very useful from that point of view.
And of course I couldn't have written Rumpel unless I'd been a criminal.
Tell us, you know what, there's been all kinds of speculation on one fall.
Is he a wealth of ego?
Is he a composite of people?
Is he a total invention?
Tell me a little bit about it if you like that.
Well, I mean, I thought I wanted a character to keep me alive in my old age.
I thought I needed a detective like Sherlock Holmes or Mary Gray or something like that.
I thought that I'd have an Earl Bailey barrister for sort of, sort of detective in a way, although he wouldn't go out and look for clues, but he would solve mysteries.
And then I thought I'd have this barrister figure.
And he was in a marvel of my father.
He wore Rumpel's uniform, black jacket and striped trousers.
He'd now last down the waistcoat.
And a lot of barristers I mess down at the El Gravy.
Barristers who called me a judge I'll darling all the time.
Never called their wives though, darling.
And a bit of me, a lot of me really, because he says what I say, what I think, and if I say it, it sounds sort of trendy and left-wing, and as he says it, it sounds very crusty.
Acceptable.
So that was really how he came about.
And I wrote one play
I'd run to a play to start with.
And then from that, there he was about it.
It was a little round of play, by the way.
So really he was an invention then?
Oh yes, yes.
But back old inventions, he has a lot of other people, a mixture of people.
I think it's more than just the coincidence of you having been a lawyer where you decided to write largely about the law.
Certainly, you know, you've written other things, but you point out that along with literature, law is something that the English
has contributed to Western culture or whatever.
Well, yes, I mean, I think our joint legal system is the best in the world, really, and our child system is very good, very fair.
Yes, I do.
I think we should be proud of the legal system and English literature and the great British breakfast system.
But we share the same legal system, really.
Of course.
And it works very well.
I mean, they cite English common law here, I think.
Yes, exactly.
How do you... How do you want people to view your way?
I mean, is it meant... Who's your audience?
I honestly don't... Me.
You see, I'm sort of... I mean, I don't think I think of an audience.
I think I try to entertain myself, and if I entertain myself, then I hope that other people will share in that.
I don't think you can write... I don't think you can think of an audience when you write.
But then, on the other hand, when I go to these places, you know, I get a very big audience, people come and listen.
So there is a big audience.
Honestly, if I'm sitting writing, I have no consciousness of an audience.
I think I can entertain myself.
And if I can make myself laugh, then I know it's all right.
And if I'm bored, I know it's absolutely no bloody good whatsoever.
So I think really, it's like performing, of course you, of course,
Of course you have to entertain an audience, but I think what you think of doing when you're writing is entertaining yourself, and then, with any luck, you're like the people who get to read the book.
Is the primary function entertainment, in your view?
It's not the only function, but I think unless you can entertain people, you've got to shut up.
I think if you're not entertaining,
I mean, King Lear is entertainment, Hamlet is entertainment, Madame Beauvoir is entertainment.
I mean, Matisse, a revolutionary poet, said that people lead very hard lives when they work hard.
When they come home, what they want to do is to be given pleasure by painting or by... And I think that's
Unless you do that, then I think you're not fulfilling any function at all.
But during the course of entertaining people, I think you should try and have some... give them some feeling of sympathy for each other or understanding of each other or understanding of the human situation.
But without entertaining people, I don't think you can...
trespass on their time.
You can say, people come and be bored with me.
So everything has to be, it always has to be new for you every time long.
Yes.
You try not to, you certainly don't ever try to repeat yourself.
Well, try not to, although of course any writer has a personality, and you're always writing with that personality.
No, I think you should try and entertain them, try and surprise them, keep them wondering what's going to happen next, which is terribly important in writing fiction.
I think unless you want to turn over the page and discover what's going to happen, you're not led through a book.
And that's quite unfashionable, because a lot of fashionable novels don't have any stories to them at all.
I did an interview with Nadine Broadway some months back when she was here in Cambridge, and she said that she feels that every one of her books is almost the same story, but from a different view, like walking around.
She doesn't mean for it to be this way, but it's like when you think you've told the story, you walk around and you look at it from a different angle, and here it comes again.
And I guess what she was saying is that she saw her body of work as a corpus,
Do you feel that your work constitutes a corpus of work?
Well, I think it's bound to, if it all comes from you.
And I think the first thing, the first requirement of a writer is they should not write like anybody else.
I mean, if you write something that could be written by anyone else, then you might as well give it up, because what you've got to do is to find the thing inside yourself that is different.
That being so, then everything you write must have that personality.
Certainly.
So that gives us, that does give us a homogeneity, I'm sure.
I mean, every book by Dickens is like a book by Dickens, it isn't like a book by Tromach or Zachary.
So in that sense, it is, yes.
Like your children were all
I knew that you had done Brideshead Revisit, which was outstanding.
Yes.
It's still, I mean, it's still playing.
Yes, it is.
I didn't realize that you'd worked on I Claudius.
Well, not the television I Claudius.
I read a play I Claudius.
Oh, you did?
Okay.
A theater play, yes.
But how is that for you, dealing with somebody else's work?
Well, it's quite different, really, because
I guess it's an obligation to be faithful to a degree... It's rather like defending somebody in the dark, you know.
You're representing every war, so therefore you've got to put their case as well as possible.
But the difficult things about writing, like thinking of stories or thinking of a theme or thinking of characters, have all been done for you by somebody else.
I think what impresses many of us is the ease
the apparent ease with which you move from one form of writing to another.
I mean, screenwriters here, people who were able to write things for television, make a hell of a lot of money.
I mean, this is... And it's a skill.
I mean, it's something that you just have to envy when you see it.
How is it that you managed to move so... Well, I think it's all the same thing, really.
I mean, I think that any piece of writing consists of a theme, a plot,
characters, drama, suspense.
And it's all the same.
I mean, there are great differences.
I mean, a novel can be told in all sorts of hundreds of different ways.
A drama can basically only be told and done or seen.
But the original impetus is really the same.
I mean, I've done
I mean, I did Boy's Land and My Father.
It started me by being a radio play.
It became a television play.
It became a stage play.
It became a film.
I mean, I don't think it was particularly different in all those different disguises.
I mean, I know how to write films because I worked in films.
I know basically not very hard to
to gather the techniques of these things.
What is hard is thinking of something original to say.
I didn't realize that you had done this as such a young man right after the war.
Yeah, well, during the war, I was... But you came here, I think, after the war, didn't you?
To hardly... Well, yes, I guess.
I mean, I worked for an American film.
Not very happily.
But I don't think there's...
I don't think there's all that amount of difference.
I don't think there's a great technical secret about everything.
So it's craft as much as anything else.
Is that what you're saying?
The difference is a craft, but the essential thing is something different.
Inspiration, or whatever you call it.
That's if you're doing your own original thing.
I mean, if you're adapting things, that's just purely craft.
I think one of the things that impressed us, and me, certainly, as Price has been, in having read the book immediately after he wrote, is how faithful you were.
Yeah, well, I think you should be.
I mean, I just did a version of Christmas Carol for the Royal Shakespeare Theatre in London, which is terribly faithful to the book.
I mean, the real problem with adapting novels for drama is that you lose the author,
The best part of Dickens, the best part of the Evening War, really, is the author talking.
And so in Christmas Carol, all the characters on the stage said all the lines of the book.
And in Brad's head, you know, there's a narrator who says the Evening War and Evening War says.
So I think that's the difficult thing to keep.
But I don't think adapting anything is...
is the same as an original act of creation.
You've also written about the art of cross-examination in the fantasy.
Yes.
It's just so pertinent to what's going on here.
Well, that's right.
I mean, my cross-examinations were much ruder than Mr. Bailey's and Mr. Shapiro's.
Did you see any of these, though?
Yes, I've seen them.
Yes, I have.
Do you find that they are hypnotic in a way?
Well, they're interesting for me because I'm used to chords.
I find them quite undramatic, really.
I mean, they seem to be so plodding and long.
Well, while you've, having been a journalist who's covered a lot of trials, I find, you know, I have the temperament to sit through a trial.
Yes, absolutely, so do I. I mean, I've sat, yes, exactly.
And it doesn't matter how many hours it is.
No.
It's fascinating.
Yes, yes, it is.
It's a revelatory process.
It's an unlayering, really.
Yes.
And I think one, you know, I just have to disagree with you slightly on whether or not it's a good idea to televise trials like this, because I have always maintained that you should never second-guess a jury, because a jury sees all the facts.
And what we're seeing is just really a synopsis in the press
or what some bonehead is saying on television.
You know, how can you make a judgment?
But here, you're not really seeing what the jury says, you're seeing more.
I know, but then why, you know, what does that do for us, do for the president?
I wonder, yeah.
But then the public can, then the jury can say to themselves, well, these people know everything.
How are we going to say the right things?
They'll think we're right.
I think it's quite dangerous, that.
And they don't allow this at all in your country?
Well, we don't have our television, of course, and all these people, these pundits would all be arrested and imprisoned for contempt, of course.
For talking outside?
Well, for talking, yes, for contempt, you know.
And the press for these interminable press conferences.
In return on everybody, you know, the jury manager, Tyler.
Yeah, amazing.
And then it seems to be terrible madness to me when they,
You know, they discuss on television whether they should allow the evidence of him having battled previous while, whatever it was.
And then they go into court and see whether that's submissive.
Or doing that witness that made, videotaping her to show at a later time.
Yes.
Maybe not show it at a later time.
Yes, I know.
That was, that was, what could a jury be thinking for ten days?
I know what all this is going on.
What in the world is going on?
Yeah, exactly.
You wonder.
But it is fascinating, of course.
You know, I really haven't questioned you at all about the book, because it's... Well, you've got the book there.
I have the book, and that's my job to read.
Yeah, exactly, yeah.
You know, and it is kind of nice to get a couple of live quotes, as they say.
I did a piece a couple weeks ago on Kelman, the Booker Prize...
Oh, yes.
...recipient.
Do you have any opinion on that huge controversy?
What about the Booker Prize?
The one that won the Booker, yeah, the fellow... I didn't, I'm afraid I haven't read it back now.
...and use a certain four-letter word, you know, by one count, 4,000 times.
Oh, I gotta see.
But it's an interesting, interesting interview.
Truly, I don't want to take up to what you're telling.
I do have plenty of material on the book.
Lovely.
Well, it's been very nice to see you.
I'm pleased to get it to half an hour.
Lots of good quotes.
Great.
And I wonder if you'd kindly inscribe my copy of the book, however, would you?
I certainly will.
Okay.